# Create a **pointblank** *multiagent* object

Multiple *agents* can be part of a single object called the
*multiagent*. This can be useful when gathering multiple agents that
have performed interrogations in the past (perhaps saved to disk with
[`x_write_disk()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/x_write_disk.md)).
When be part of a *multiagent*, we can get a report that shows how data
quality evolved over time. This can be of interest when it's important
to monitor data quality and even the evolution of the validation plan
itself. The reporting table, generated by printing a
`ptblank_multiagent` object or by using the
[`get_multiagent_report()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/get_multiagent_report.md)
function, is, by default, organized by the interrogation time and it
automatically recognizes which validation steps are equivalent across
interrogations.

## Usage

``` r
create_multiagent(..., lang = NULL, locale = NULL)
```

## Arguments

- ...:

  *Pointblank agents*

  `<series of obj:<ptblank_agent>>` // **required**

  One or more **pointblank** agent objects.

- lang:

  *Reporting language*

  `scalar<character>` // *default:* `NULL` (`optional`)

  The language to use for any reporting that will be generated from the
  *multiagent*. (e.g., individual *agent reports*, *multiagent reports*,
  etc.). By default, `NULL` will create English (`"en"`) text. Other
  options include French (`"fr"`), German (`"de"`), Italian (`"it"`),
  Spanish (`"es"`), Portuguese (`"pt"`), Turkish (`"tr"`), Chinese
  (`"zh"`), Russian (`"ru"`), Polish (`"pl"`), Danish (`"da"`), Swedish
  (`"sv"`), and Dutch (`"nl"`).

- locale:

  *Locale for value formatting within reports*

  `scalar<character>` // *default:* `NULL` (`optional`)

  An optional locale ID to use for formatting values in the reporting
  outputs according the locale's rules. Examples include `"en_US"` for
  English (United States) and `"fr_FR"` for French (France); more
  simply, this can be a language identifier without a country
  designation, like "es" for Spanish (Spain, same as `"es_ES"`).

## Value

A `ptblank_multiagent` object.

## Examples

For the example below, we'll use two different, yet simple tables.

First, `tbl_1`:

    tbl_1 <-
      dplyr::tibble(
        a = c(5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5),
        b = c(1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2),
        c = c(1, 1, 1, 2, 3, 4),
        d = LETTERS[a],
        e = LETTERS[b],
        f = LETTERS[c]
      )

    tbl_1
    #> # A tibble: 6 x 6
    #>       a     b     c d     e     f
    #>   <dbl> <dbl> <dbl> <chr> <chr> <chr>
    #> 1     5     1     1 E     A     A
    #> 2     5     1     1 E     A     A
    #> 3     5     1     1 E     A     A
    #> 4     5     2     2 E     B     B
    #> 5     5     2     3 E     B     C
    #> 6     5     2     4 E     B     D

And next, `tbl_2`:

    tbl_2 <-
      dplyr::tibble(
        a = c(5, 7, 6, 5, 8, 7),
        b = LETTERS[1:6]
      )

    tbl_2
    #> # A tibble: 6 x 2
    #>       a b
    #>   <dbl> <chr>
    #> 1     5 A
    #> 2     7 B
    #> 3     6 C
    #> 4     5 D
    #> 5     8 E
    #> 6     7 F

Next, we'll create two different agents, each interrogating a different
table.

First up, is `agent_1`:

    agent_1 <-
      create_agent(
        tbl = tbl_1,
        tbl_name = "tbl_1",
        label = "Example table 1."
      ) %>%
      col_vals_gt(columns = a, value = 4) %>%
      interrogate()

Then, `agent_2`:

    agent_2 <-
      create_agent(
        tbl = tbl_2,
        tbl_name = "tbl_2",
        label = "Example table 2."
      ) %>%
      col_is_character(columns = b) %>%
      interrogate()

Now, we'll combine the two agents into a *multiagent* with the
`create_multiagent()` function. Printing the `"ptblank_multiagent"`
object displays the multiagent report with its default options (i.e., a
'long' report view).

    multiagent <- create_multiagent(agent_1, agent_2)

    multiagent

![This image was generated from the first code example in the
\`create_multiagent()\` help
file.](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rstudio/pointblank/main/images/man_create_multiagent_1.png)

To take advantage of more display options, we could use the
[`get_multiagent_report()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/get_multiagent_report.md)
function. The added functionality there allows for a 'wide' view of the
data (useful for monitoring validations of the same table over repeated
interrogations), the ability to modify the title of the multiagent
report, and a means to export the report to HTML (via
[`export_report()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/export_report.md)).

## Function ID

10-1

## See also

Other The multiagent:
[`get_multiagent_report()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/get_multiagent_report.md),
[`read_disk_multiagent()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/read_disk_multiagent.md)
