# Does the target table match a comparison table?

The `tbl_match()` validation function, the `expect_tbl_match()`
expectation function, and the `test_tbl_match()` test function all check
whether the target table's composition matches that of a comparison
table. The validation function can be used directly on a data table or
with an *agent* object (technically, a `ptblank_agent` object) whereas
the expectation and test functions can only be used with a data table.
The types of data tables that can be used include data frames, tibbles,
database tables (`tbl_dbi`), and Spark DataFrames (`tbl_spark`). As a
validation step or as an expectation, there is a single test unit that
hinges on whether the two tables are the same (after any `preconditions`
have been applied).

## Usage

``` r
tbl_match(
  x,
  tbl_compare,
  preconditions = NULL,
  segments = NULL,
  actions = NULL,
  step_id = NULL,
  label = NULL,
  brief = NULL,
  active = TRUE
)

expect_tbl_match(object, tbl_compare, preconditions = NULL, threshold = 1)

test_tbl_match(object, tbl_compare, preconditions = NULL, threshold = 1)
```

## Arguments

- x:

  *A pointblank agent or a data table*

  `obj:<ptblank_agent>|obj:<tbl_*>` // **required**

  A data frame, tibble (`tbl_df` or `tbl_dbi`), Spark DataFrame
  (`tbl_spark`), or, an *agent* object of class `ptblank_agent` that is
  commonly created with
  [`create_agent()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/create_agent.md).

- tbl_compare:

  *A data table for comparison*

  `obj:<tbl_*>` // **required**

  A table to compare against the target table. This can either be a
  table object, a table-prep formula. This can be a table object such as
  a data frame, a tibble, a `tbl_dbi` object, or a `tbl_spark` object.
  Alternatively, a table-prep formula (`~ <tbl reading code>`) or a
  function (`function() <tbl reading code>`) can be used to lazily read
  in the table at interrogation time.

- preconditions:

  *Input table modification prior to validation*

  `<table mutation expression>` // *default:* `NULL` (`optional`)

  An optional expression for mutating the input table before proceeding
  with the validation. This can either be provided as a one-sided R
  formula using a leading `~` (e.g.,
  `~ . %>% dplyr::mutate(col = col + 10)` or as a function (e.g.,
  `function(x) dplyr::mutate(x, col = col + 10)`. See the
  *Preconditions* section for more information.

- segments:

  *Expressions for segmenting the target table*

  `<segmentation expressions>` // *default:* `NULL` (`optional`)

  An optional expression or set of expressions (held in a list) that
  serve to segment the target table by column values. Each expression
  can be given in one of two ways: (1) as column names, or (2) as a
  two-sided formula where the LHS holds a column name and the RHS
  contains the column values to segment on. See the *Segments* section
  for more details on this.

- actions:

  *Thresholds and actions for different states*

  `obj:<action_levels>` // *default:* `NULL` (`optional`)

  A list containing threshold levels so that the validation step can
  react accordingly when exceeding the set levels for different states.
  This is to be created with the
  [`action_levels()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/action_levels.md)
  helper function.

- step_id:

  *Manual setting of the step ID value*

  `scalar<character>` // *default:* `NULL` (`optional`)

  One or more optional identifiers for the single or multiple validation
  steps generated from calling a validation function. The use of step
  IDs serves to distinguish validation steps from each other and provide
  an opportunity for supplying a more meaningful label compared to the
  step index. By default this is `NULL`, and **pointblank** will
  automatically generate the step ID value (based on the step index) in
  this case. One or more values can be provided, and the exact number of
  ID values should (1) match the number of validation steps that the
  validation function call will produce (influenced by the number of
  `columns` provided), (2) be an ID string not used in any previous
  validation step, and (3) be a vector with unique values.

- label:

  *Optional label for the validation step*

  `vector<character>` // *default:* `NULL` (`optional`)

  Optional label for the validation step. This label appears in the
  *agent* report and, for the best appearance, it should be kept quite
  short. See the *Labels* section for more information.

- brief:

  *Brief description for the validation step*

  `scalar<character>` // *default:* `NULL` (`optional`)

  A *brief* is a short, text-based description for the validation step.
  If nothing is provided here then an *autobrief* is generated by the
  *agent*, using the language provided in
  [`create_agent()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/create_agent.md)'s
  `lang` argument (which defaults to `"en"` or English). The *autobrief*
  incorporates details of the validation step so it's often the
  preferred option in most cases (where a `label` might be better suited
  to succinctly describe the validation).

- active:

  *Is the validation step active?*

  `scalar<logical>` // *default:* `TRUE`

  A logical value indicating whether the validation step should be
  active. If the validation function is working with an *agent*, `FALSE`
  will make the validation step inactive (still reporting its presence
  and keeping indexes for the steps unchanged). If the validation
  function will be operating directly on data (no *agent* involvement),
  then any step with `active = FALSE` will simply pass the data through
  with no validation whatsoever. Aside from a logical vector, a
  one-sided R formula using a leading `~` can be used with `.` (serving
  as the input data table) to evaluate to a single logical value. With
  this approach, the **pointblank** function
  [`has_columns()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/has_columns.md)
  can be used to determine whether to make a validation step active on
  the basis of one or more columns existing in the table (e.g.,
  `~ . %>% has_columns(c(d, e))`).

- object:

  *A data table for expectations or tests*

  `obj:<tbl_*>` // **required**

  A data frame, tibble (`tbl_df` or `tbl_dbi`), or Spark DataFrame
  (`tbl_spark`) that serves as the target table for the expectation
  function or the test function.

- threshold:

  *The failure threshold*

  `scalar<integer|numeric>(val>=0)` // *default:* `1`

  A simple failure threshold value for use with the expectation
  (`expect_`) and the test (`test_`) function variants. By default, this
  is set to `1` meaning that any single unit of failure in data
  validation results in an overall test failure. Whole numbers beyond
  `1` indicate that any failing units up to that absolute threshold
  value will result in a succeeding **testthat** test or evaluate to
  `TRUE`. Likewise, fractional values (between `0` and `1`) act as a
  proportional failure threshold, where `0.15` means that 15 percent of
  failing test units results in an overall test failure.

## Value

For the validation function, the return value is either a
`ptblank_agent` object or a table object (depending on whether an agent
object or a table was passed to `x`). The expectation function invisibly
returns its input but, in the context of testing data, the function is
called primarily for its potential side-effects (e.g., signaling
failure). The test function returns a logical value.

## Supported Input Tables

The types of data tables that are officially supported are:

- data frames (`data.frame`) and tibbles (`tbl_df`)

- Spark DataFrames (`tbl_spark`)

- the following database tables (`tbl_dbi`):

  - *PostgreSQL* tables (using the
    [`RPostgres::Postgres()`](https://rpostgres.r-dbi.org/reference/Postgres.html)
    as driver)

  - *MySQL* tables (with
    [`RMySQL::MySQL()`](https://r-dbi.r-universe.dev/RMySQL/reference/MySQLDriver-class.html))

  - *Microsoft SQL Server* tables (via **odbc**)

  - *BigQuery* tables (using
    [`bigrquery::bigquery()`](https://bigrquery.r-dbi.org/reference/bigquery.html))

  - *DuckDB* tables (through
    [`duckdb::duckdb()`](https://r.duckdb.org/reference/duckdb.html))

  - *SQLite* (with
    [`RSQLite::SQLite()`](https://rsqlite.r-dbi.org/reference/SQLite.html))

## Preconditions

Providing expressions as `preconditions` means **pointblank** will
preprocess the target table during interrogation as a preparatory step.
It might happen that this particular validation requires some operation
on the target table before the comparison takes place. Using
`preconditions` can be useful at times since since we can develop a
large validation plan with a single target table and make minor
adjustments to it, as needed, along the way.

The table mutation is totally isolated in scope to the validation
step(s) where `preconditions` is used. Using **dplyr** code is suggested
here since the statements can be translated to SQL if necessary (i.e.,
if the target table resides in a database). The code is most easily
supplied as a one-sided **R** formula (using a leading `~`). In the
formula representation, the `.` serves as the input data table to be
transformed. Alternatively, a function could instead be supplied.

## Segments

By using the `segments` argument, it's possible to define a particular
validation with segments (or row slices) of the target table. An
optional expression or set of expressions that serve to segment the
target table by column values. Each expression can be given in one of
two ways: (1) as column names, or (2) as a two-sided formula where the
LHS holds a column name and the RHS contains the column values to
segment on.

As an example of the first type of expression that can be used,
`vars(a_column)` will segment the target table in however many unique
values are present in the column called `a_column`. This is great if
every unique value in a particular column (like different locations, or
different dates) requires it's own repeating validation.

With a formula, we can be more selective with which column values should
be used for segmentation. Using `a_column ~ c("group_1", "group_2")`
will attempt to obtain two segments where one is a slice of data where
the value `"group_1"` exists in the column named `"a_column"`, and, the
other is a slice where `"group_2"` exists in the same column. Each group
of rows resolved from the formula will result in a separate validation
step.

Segmentation will always occur after `preconditions` (i.e., statements
that mutate the target table), if any, are applied. With this type of
one-two combo, it's possible to generate labels for segmentation using
an expression for `preconditions` and refer to those labels in
`segments` without having to generate a separate version of the target
table.

## Actions

Often, we will want to specify `actions` for the validation. This
argument, present in every validation function, takes a
specially-crafted list object that is best produced by the
[`action_levels()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/action_levels.md)
function. Read that function's documentation for the lowdown on how to
create reactions to above-threshold failure levels in validation. The
basic gist is that you'll want at least a single threshold level
(specified as either the fraction of test units failed, or, an absolute
value), often using the `warn_at` argument. Using
`action_levels(warn_at = 1)` or `action_levels(stop_at = 1)` are good
choices depending on the situation (the first produces a warning, the
other [`stop()`](https://rdrr.io/r/base/stop.html)s).

## Labels

`label` may be a single string or a character vector that matches the
number of expanded steps. `label` also supports `{glue}` syntax and
exposes the following dynamic variables contextualized to the current
step:

- `"{.step}"`: The validation step name

- `"{.seg_col}"`: The current segment's column name

- `"{.seg_val}"`: The current segment's value/group

The glue context also supports ordinary expressions for further
flexibility (e.g., `"{toupper(.step)}"`) as long as they return a
length-1 string.

## Briefs

Want to describe this validation step in some detail? Keep in mind that
this is only useful if `x` is an *agent*. If that's the case, `brief`
the agent with some text that fits. Don't worry if you don't want to do
it. The *autobrief* protocol is kicked in when `brief = NULL` and a
simple brief will then be automatically generated.

## YAML

A **pointblank** agent can be written to YAML with
[`yaml_write()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/yaml_write.md)
and the resulting YAML can be used to regenerate an agent (with
[`yaml_read_agent()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/yaml_read_agent.md))
or interrogate the target table (via
[`yaml_agent_interrogate()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/yaml_agent_interrogate.md)).
When `tbl_match()` is represented in YAML (under the top-level `steps`
key as a list member), the syntax closely follows the signature of the
validation function. Here is an example of how a complex call of
`tbl_match()` as a validation step is expressed in R code and in the
corresponding YAML representation.

R statement:

    agent %>%
      tbl_match(
        tbl_compare = ~ file_tbl(
          file = from_github(
            file = "sj_all_revenue_large.rds",
            repo = "rich-iannone/intendo",
            subdir = "data-large"
            )
          ),
        preconditions = ~ . %>% dplyr::filter(a < 10),
        segments = b ~ c("group_1", "group_2"),
        actions = action_levels(warn_at = 0.1, stop_at = 0.2),
        label = "The `tbl_match()` step.",
        active = FALSE
      )

YAML representation:

    steps:
    - tbl_match:
        tbl_compare: ~ file_tbl(
          file = from_github(
            file = "sj_all_revenue_large.rds",
            repo = "rich-iannone/intendo",
            subdir = "data-large"
            )
          )
        preconditions: ~. %>% dplyr::filter(a < 10)
        segments: b ~ c("group_1", "group_2")
        actions:
          warn_fraction: 0.1
          stop_fraction: 0.2
        label: The `tbl_match()` step.
        active: false

In practice, both of these will often be shorter. Arguments with default
values won't be written to YAML when using
[`yaml_write()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/yaml_write.md)
(though it is acceptable to include them with their default when
generating the YAML by other means). It is also possible to preview the
transformation of an agent to YAML without any writing to disk by using
the
[`yaml_agent_string()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/yaml_agent_string.md)
function.

## Examples

Create a simple table with three columns and four rows of values.

    tbl <-
      dplyr::tibble(
        a = c(5, 7, 6, 5),
        b = c(7, 1, 0, 0),
        c = c(1, 1, 1, 3)
      )

    tbl
    #> # A tibble: 4 x 3
    #>       a     b     c
    #>   <dbl> <dbl> <dbl>
    #> 1     5     7     1
    #> 2     7     1     1
    #> 3     6     0     1
    #> 4     5     0     3

Create a second table which is the same as `tbl`.

    tbl_2 <-
      dplyr::tibble(
        a = c(5, 7, 6, 5),
        b = c(7, 1, 0, 0),
        c = c(1, 1, 1, 3)
      )

    tbl_2
    #> # A tibble: 4 x 3
    #>       a     b     c
    #>   <dbl> <dbl> <dbl>
    #> 1     5     7     1
    #> 2     7     1     1
    #> 3     6     0     1
    #> 4     5     0     3

### A: Using an `agent` with validation functions and then [`interrogate()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/interrogate.md)

Validate that the target table (`tbl`) and the comparison table
(`tbl_2`) are equivalent in terms of content.

    agent <-
      create_agent(tbl = tbl) %>%
      tbl_match(tbl_compare = tbl_2) %>%
      interrogate()

Printing the `agent` in the console shows the validation report in the
Viewer. Here is an excerpt of validation report, showing the single
entry that corresponds to the validation step demonstrated here.

![This image was generated from the first code example in the
\`tbl_match()\` help
file.](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rstudio/pointblank/main/images/man_tbl_match_1.png)

### B: Using the validation function directly on the data (no `agent`)

This way of using validation functions acts as a data filter. Data is
passed through but should [`stop()`](https://rdrr.io/r/base/stop.html)
if there is a single test unit failing. The behavior of side effects can
be customized with the `actions` option.

    tbl %>% tbl_match(tbl_compare = tbl_2)
    #> # A tibble: 4 x 3
    #>       a     b     c
    #>   <dbl> <dbl> <dbl>
    #> 1     5     7     1
    #> 2     7     1     1
    #> 3     6     0     1
    #> 4     5     0     3

### C: Using the expectation function

With the `expect_*()` form, we would typically perform one validation at
a time. This is primarily used in **testthat** tests.

    expect_tbl_match(tbl, tbl_compare = tbl_2)

### D: Using the test function

With the `test_*()` form, we should get a single logical value returned
to us.

    tbl %>% test_tbl_match(tbl_compare = tbl_2)
    #> [1] TRUE

## Function ID

2-33

## See also

Other validation functions:
[`col_count_match()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_count_match.md),
[`col_exists()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_exists.md),
[`col_is_character()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_is_character.md),
[`col_is_date()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_is_date.md),
[`col_is_factor()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_is_factor.md),
[`col_is_integer()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_is_integer.md),
[`col_is_logical()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_is_logical.md),
[`col_is_numeric()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_is_numeric.md),
[`col_is_posix()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_is_posix.md),
[`col_schema_match()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_schema_match.md),
[`col_vals_between()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_vals_between.md),
[`col_vals_decreasing()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_vals_decreasing.md),
[`col_vals_equal()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_vals_equal.md),
[`col_vals_expr()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_vals_expr.md),
[`col_vals_gt()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_vals_gt.md),
[`col_vals_gte()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_vals_gte.md),
[`col_vals_in_set()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_vals_in_set.md),
[`col_vals_increasing()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_vals_increasing.md),
[`col_vals_lt()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_vals_lt.md),
[`col_vals_lte()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_vals_lte.md),
[`col_vals_make_set()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_vals_make_set.md),
[`col_vals_make_subset()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_vals_make_subset.md),
[`col_vals_not_between()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_vals_not_between.md),
[`col_vals_not_equal()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_vals_not_equal.md),
[`col_vals_not_in_set()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_vals_not_in_set.md),
[`col_vals_not_null()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_vals_not_null.md),
[`col_vals_null()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_vals_null.md),
[`col_vals_regex()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_vals_regex.md),
[`col_vals_within_spec()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/col_vals_within_spec.md),
[`conjointly()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/conjointly.md),
[`row_count_match()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/row_count_match.md),
[`rows_complete()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/rows_complete.md),
[`rows_distinct()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/rows_distinct.md),
[`serially()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/serially.md),
[`specially()`](https://rstudio.github.io/pointblank/reference/specially.md)
